Let's talk about practice for loops, going
down to control statements and looping.
We talked about if, else, and else if,
so when we have a statement like this,
the if statement, we're gonna check and
see if the expression afterwards is true.
If it is, we'll run this code,
if there's an else if present and
the if statement is false,
we will keep checking the else ifs
until we find one that is true.
If there are no else ifs
with a true statement,
then we will jump to the else and
go through the code here.
So in this case,
when we call this on the number 5,
we're gonna print out this
is a small number, for 99,
we're gonna say, this,
This is a pretty small number as well.
If it's exactly 100, we're gonna say,
this number is all right.
And then for this number here,
we will jump to the else statement, and
say this number is huge.
We can also have multiple
conditions in an if statement.
So here we're checking to see if
the number that is passed into fizzbuzz
is both divisible by 3 and divisible by 5,
then we'll print fizzbuzz.
So we print nothing for 3, nothing for
5, and then fizzbuzz for the number 15.
We also can use if to test for
an empty list.
So here, my function is expecting a list.
Remember that an empty list is falsey and
resolves to false,
while a list with values in it is
truthy and will resolve to true.
So when I pass in a list with values,
this if statement will be valid and
I'll jump down into this block of code.
If I pass in an empty list,
I'm going to jump straight
to the else statement here and
print out, got an empty list.
We talked about some of those helper
functions, like the range and
enumerate, we can use those in
conjunction with the for loop as well.
If I have a list defined here, if I wanted
to go through all the values between 0 and
2, I could write them out manually and
have a bad time of it.
Or instead, I can use a shortcut of the
range function, passing a start of 0 and
an end of 3, because that ending value
is not inclusive and do the same thing.
The advantage of using range is that
there are some optimizations in play
that mean I don't have to define
a list with all my values in it.
Which is fine for my list of three items,
but starts to become more of an issue for
large or complex lists.
And lastly, if we wanted to loop over and
have both an index and
the value at that index,
we want to use the enumerate function.
And the enumerate function is a generator.
But if you take a look at
what it's actually returning,
it's returning a list of tuples.
And the first item in that tuple is an
index, and the second is the item itself.
So we can use tuple unpacking in our for
statement here and
get back the index and
the item from enumerate all in one step.
We can also use this to
loop over a dictionary.
Remember, by default, if you loop over
a dictionary, you loop over just the keys.
If you want both the keys and the values,
you have to make sure that you
call the .items function on it.
And when you do that, you also get
back a list of tuples with the first
value being the key and
the second value being the value itself.
So you can also use tuple unpacking
here to loop through both the key and
the value at the same time.
We can use return statements to break
out of functions and break out of loops,
which is useful when you are looking for
a flag.
And I'm not going to go over while loops,
but
if you want to learn more about
while loops or nested loops,
I recommend that you read the chapters
at practical.learnpython.dev.
I also recommend that you check out
the optional chapter on break and
continue on your own time, because those
are two concepts that tend to trip out
folks who are beginners or
intermediate programmers, and
they're important concepts for
you to have a solid grasp of.